---
layout: post
title: "How Proper Note-Taking Helped Me Pass CPTS, CDSA, & CRTO"
date: 2025-03-15 10:00:00 +0000
categories: [Informational]
---

The reason I'm making this post is not to show off, but rather to motivate and help anyone that might be planning on tackling any of these certifications, or any certification in the infosec space in general.

To start off, I'll talk about the CPTS as that was the first of the three I tackled back in August of 2024. I won't be going into depth on any of the certifications, but rather giving a brief explanation as to what they are, my experience with them, and what I felt, was the key factor in being able to succeed with relative ease.

## CPTS
---

The HTB CPTS (Certified Penetration Testing Specialist) certification involves completing the CPTS job-role path within the HTB Academy modules, which then grants you the eligbility to attempt the exam. The exam revolves around a 10-day period you're given, where you must perform a penetration test for an enterprise company and gain atleast 12/14 flags, alongside creating a professional-grade report on the findings.

Long story short, I was able to pass the CPTS on my first attempt. After averaging about 4 flags per day, I was able to knockout all the flags I needed to pass by the third day. Tacking in the report-writing, I had submit my exam by the sixth day (out of the 10 days total I was given). Personally, I felt the exam was relatively straight-forward, avoided any unnecessary rabbit-holes, and overall was extremely fun. No complaints.

## CDSA
---

Noving onto the HTB CDSA (Certified Defensive Security Analyst) certification, this cert also requires that you complete the associated job-role path within the Academy platform, before being able to take the exam. This exam however, is only 7 days. The exam is quite similar to the CPTS in that it also, requires a certain amount of flags to be obtained whilst also providing a professional-grade report on the incidents at hand. 

For this exam, I was able to obtain all the flags except one within the first day, and had finished my report by the third. The exam itself was a _lot_ easier than I had anticipated.

## CRTO
---

Lastly, Zero-Point Security's CRTO (Certified Red Team Operator). This is a 4 day exam, and doesn't require you to complete the course associated with it to be able to attempt the exam (although I'd of course recommend you do take the course, especially if you're unfamiliar with Cobalt Strike). The course content and the exam are mainly focused on Active Directory enumeration and attacks, but with the added task of avoiding Windows Defender, something CPTS doesn't really cover. This however, is made relatively trivial by the provisioning of Cobalt Strike within the course and the exam environment, so its nothing toooo scary. 

I was able to complete the exam within the first day in this case, obtaining a total of 6/8 flags (6 being required to pass), and calling it there since I was quite lazy and didn't bother trying too hard for the 7th and 8th. Oh and also, this exam doesn't require a report to be produced alongside it.

## How I Passed

The one thing that I felt that made such a big difference for me; and not just in within these exams, but in general, was my note taking. Now of course everyone knows note-taking is important, yada, yada. And I understand that everyone has their own different ways of taking notes, and what they consider to be good notes and bad notes. But I think everyone can agree that a good set of notes should generally allow for the following:
- Better Retention & Understanding
- Efficient Review & Revision
- Enhanced Problem-Solving
- Organized & Easy To Access

The reason as to why I bring this up is because when I first started taking notes early in my journey into cybersecurity, I kinda neglected taking notes, believing they wouldn’t make much of a difference. I quickly began to realize how much of a mistake this was, especially when you're learning so many new concepts the way I was since I didn't really have a background into IT. I would constantly learn something new, forget it the next day, or forget it by the time I encountered a situation where the information would've actually proven beneficial. 

I understood there wasn't really any way I'd be able to retain so much new information in my head without forgetting a majority of it, especially when it comes to tool syntax/cli usage/etc, and thats fine! So I decided to begin structuring my notes in such a way that made it so incredibly easy for me to quickly reference information TODO


